title: Humanistic design principles
- author: Kiarii Ngua
- link: https://touchedspace.files.wordpress.com/2017/01/thehumanexperience1.pdf
- overview: This guideline suggests some human aspects that are fundamental in designing for humans and a purpose thereof, as it were. These are happiness, fulfillment, integration, health, freedom, play, and the expression of an intrinsic drive. 
A human being is a complex, organic system consisting of various capacities and dimensions with growth potentialities, a system in a continuous process of growth and transition towards a higher form of itself, an inherent process that is herein referred to as the human purpose. If such is the human purpose, the being, and becoming, more and more of what one is capable are one and the same, designing for the one is designing for the other. 
principles:
- principle: Design for the pursuit for happiness
  - summary: More than anything else, human beings strive for happiness - a deep sense of enjoyment that occurs as accompaniment of activity in which an individual by investing their capacities and dimensions experience, attain or realize fuller health, self expression, integration, fulfilment and freedom - for its own sake. Happiness is not something that happens, or that can be bought, or commanded, but a condition that must individually be prepared for, cultivated and defended.
  A certain kind of pleasure may be considered as happiness, the kind experienced during contact with an external stimuli when it serves to maintain homeostasis or an order in consciousness. A variant pleasure marks passivity, receptivity or dependence on external suggestion - for instance, the use of drugs - which neither helps maintain homeostasis nor brings about growth in the being as it dulls human capacities and dimensions.  This latter type of pleasure is not implicated in the striving for happiness. In any case, it results to atrophy; a weakening of the respective individual’s capacities and dimensions.
  Happiness refers neither to the distraction of individuals through a continued excitation of their various pleasurable organs, nor the authoritative control, manipulation and guidance of individuals from which only dependence on pleasure - receptivity to external suggestion - and factitious experiences are attainable.
- principle: Design for self actualization
  - summary: Self actualization is the striving to become more and more of what one is capable. In self actualizing, an individual grows; becomes more complex - in their dimensions and capacities - than they were before. On the one hand the individual moves towards a uniqueness - that leaves them feeling more capable, more skilful and in possession of rarer skills - which sets them apart from others, and on the other hand towards more integration - within themselves and with others - which enables them to have more altruistic and loving relation with others.
  Self actualization is a quest, a mystery, a leap of faith for which there is no recipe or formula; no one knows what they will become or what will make them happy; one has to daringly use all their human capacities and dimensions, to listen to and determine for themselves, their own selves, at each moment in life to find what may potentially fulfil them and result to the realization of higher forms of themselves.
- principle: Design for Autonomy; voluntary participation
  - summary: Paradoxically, it is when we act freely, for the sake of the action itself rather than for ulterior motives, that we learn to become more than what we were. When we choose a goal and invest ourselves in it to the limits of our concentration, whatever we do will be enjoyable. And once we have tasted this joy, we will redouble our efforts to taste it again. This is the way the self grows.  
  Autonomy implies voluntary participation characterized firstly, by withdrawal from phenomenon that may harbor harmful experiences and secondly, by participation in phenomenon that may nurture and afford the realization of fuller play, health, self fulfilment and happiness for a respective individual. Withdrawal should be given preference due to the default nature of being in which we find ourselves as, or being regarded as, part of a phenomenon without there being an active and conscious decision on our part to partake. 
  Autonomy here should not be taken to imply an independence from others or from culture, but rather an unrestricted expression and development of one’s capacities and dimensions as one desires. Relations to others and to culture ought to be maintained as long as they do not interfere with the individual’s strivings of the human purpose. 
  One cannot be free by opposing another, one’s freedom does not depend on the loss of freedom for others.
- principle: Design for holism
  - summary: Self realization cannot be achieved by intellect or rationality alone. We must modify considerably our picture of the psychological organism to respect equally rationality, emotionality, and the conative or wishing and driving side of our nature, which are not necessarily antagonistic but can be cooperative and synergic. The healthy person is all of a piece.
  Holism implies a striving to act holistically, integrating and taking into use all capacities and dimensions into the phenomenon at hand. Holism or integration within oneself means that one’s capacities and dimensions are in agreement with the phenomenon at hand and thus the individual has more of themselves to use as there is no threat to thwart or defend against. As a whole - integrated within himself - the individual is organized and coordinated much more perfectly than usual so he acts without doubt or hesitation, with energy yet effortlessly, is fully functioning, more spontaneous, more open to experience with the phenomenon at hand.
  Dualism - cleaving into two that which is one - attempts to understand the body in isolation from the mind. There is no such separation: there is no body that is not mind, no mind that is not body; we are and act as wholes in processes.
- principle: Design for play
  - summary: The human purpose is chiefly directed at play - the strivings for happiness, self expression, autonomy, holism and self actualization - and as a by-product at work. When work is aligned with the strivings of the human purpose it becomes one and the same with play. For individuals engaged in such play, primarily, both the source and end of an activity partaken are in the self and as a by-product, productive in its own right. Such individuals enjoy being productive, as it comes naturally and automatically for them; they do not have to be manipulated or coerced into it.
  The term play has been used for lack of a better term to describe what happens during the strivings of the human purpose. It seemingly appears to an observer that an individual is mostly acting aimlessly, in which case it is ignorantly said that the individual is playing, where even play itself is not thought of as an important goal, but as something that should not accompany work and may only be experienced after work. Typically, work has been depicted as the opposite of play. It involves an acting aimed at productivity without little if any concern for the strivings of the human purpose. In the context of the human purpose, while play is primarily concerned with the strivings for happiness, fulfillment, self expression and holism, work is chiefly concerned with productivity. When work is aligned with the strivings of the human purpose it becomes one and the same with play.
- principle: Design for the expression of an intrinsic drive
  - summary: A human being is the genius of itself; it is driven by vitality and spontaneity originating from within itself. In contrast, a machine does not have the merest trace of its own spontaneity or vitality and thus can only be driven by energy originating from outside itself.
  The genuine principle of interest thus is the principle of the recognized identity of the fact or proposed line of action with the self; that it lies in the direction of the individual’s own self-expression and is therefore, imperiously demanded, if the individual is to be himself: human. We neither have to appeal to sheer strength of will nor do we have to occupy ourselves in coercing or the individual into action or with making things interesting to them.
  principle: design for good human relations
  Belongingness, respect, protection, love, security, self-esteem, and other human relational needs cannot be satisfied by trees, mountains or even dogs; only from healthy relations with other human beings. It is also, only, to other human beings that we can give these in the fullest measure. 
  A good design for a societal tool or practice must have its arrangements set up in such a way as to foster, encourage, and produce a maximum of good human relationships: love, friendliness and neighborliness, and a minimum if any of bad human relationships: abandonment, exploitation, combatance and ethnocentrism. 
  The contradiction inherent in all evil is that it originates in the desire to eliminate evil.
- principle: Design for health
  - summary: A phenomenon that does not facilitate the attainment of more and more health; the realization, striving and experience of self actualization, happiness, self expression, autonomy, good human relations and play for its partakers results to the atrophy of the human capacities and dimensions, and inescapably to pathology and maladjustment. Dehumanization.
- principle: Design for metaphysical specialness (divinity)
   - summary: Enlightened designers leave open the possibility of either metaphysical specialness in humans or in the potential for unforeseen creative processes. That kind of modesty is the signature quality of being human-centered.
  A human bears or exhibits metaphysical specialness; it is neither definable nor intelligible. If speaking about the human and process thereof is itself part of the same process, there is something that must remain permanently hidden from the speaker. Human intelligibility would require an objective, dispassionate and unobstructed view, a position that only a god can claim. 
  The assumption guiding our struggle against nature is that deep within itself nature contains a structure, an order, that is ultimately intelligible to the human understanding. A human being is too high-born to be propertied, to be a secondary at control, or useful serving-man and instrument.
  When we use mechanized models of learning or friendship or self actualization, and ask people to conduct their lives through our models, we are potentially reducing life itself. Such models encourage narrow philosophies that deny the mystery of the existence and experience for an individual.
- Tags: Universal, Human, Human experience, Humanistic
